[ZIP 207] Split Founders' Reward (#201)
zcash/zips: zip-0207.rst

::

  ZIP: 207
  Title: Split Founders' Reward
  Author: Jack Grigg <jack@z.cash>
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2019-01-04
  License: MIT

Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

Abstract
========

This proposal defines how the consensus rules are altered to split the original Founders' Reward across three
recipient addresses per block instead of one, corresponding to the three funding streams contained within it.

Motivation
==========

Since the launch of the Zcash network, the consensus rules have required that until the first block reward
halving (at block 850,000), each block must send 20% of the block subsidy to a hard-coded transparent address.
[#block-subsidy]_ This stream of 2.5-ZEC outputs (the value after the mining slow-start was completed) can be

> split into three logical funding streams: [#continued-funding]_

Reviewer: Delete logical?

- (73.7%) The Founders' Reward stream
- (14.4%) The Zcash Foundation Endowment stream

> - (11.9%) The Zerocoin Electric Coin Company Strategic Reserve stream

Author: These percentages are taken from the 2016 "Continued Funding and Transparency" blog post, and need to be updated.

Modifying the consensus rules to allocate the 2.5 ZEC across three separate recipient addresses decouples
these three funding streams organizationally, legally, and operationally. It further reinforces transparency
as to the structure of the original Founders' Reward.

Specification
=============

Funding streams
---------------

> A funding stream is defined by a constant value per block (in zatoshis), a start height (inclusive), and an

Reviewer: In pairing with Daira: As a constant value per block, if there is any change in the block interval or block subsidy, the funding stream would need to be redefined.  To help maintain independence, perhaps a funding stream could be defined as a fraction of the block subsidy?  This should not change this spec or its implementation too much.

Author: I'll try updating the ZIP to use fractions and see if it ends up cleaner.

end height (exclusive). The start height MUST be after the end of the mining slow-start (to make specification
of the value simpler).

- To-do: Decide whether to use fractional value per block instead, which gets around the mining slow-start

>   problem (and halvings) but might make implementation more complex.

Reviewer 2: Given that we intend to alter the block target time & issuance-per-block (to have faster blocks while keeping a consistent issuance schedule based on time), it is "cleaner" to define the spec by fractional values of the total block issuance. Also, in terms of code, it may help to use the same abstraction.

However, if that's too complex, then we need to specify both this and the changes block rate so that they dovetail together. Also, any future change to block rate during the active period of this spec requires a further modification, though I don't anticipate any.

An active funding stream at a given block height is defined as a funding stream for which the block height is
less than its end height, but not less than its start height.

Each funding stream has an associated set of recipient addresses. Each address is used for at most 17500
blocks, creating a roughly-monthly sequence of funding periods. The address to be used for a given block
height is defined as follows (using ``SlowStartShift`` as-defined in [#block-subsidy]_)::

    AddressChangeInterval = 17500
    FundingStream.AddressIndex(height) =
        floor((height - FundingStream.StartHeight) / AddressChangeInterval)

>     Address(height) = FundingStream.Addresses[FundingStream.AddressIndex(height)]

Reviewer 2: Can we make this code more explicitly parameterized by funding stream? Something like ``FundingStream[FUND].AddressIndex(height)`` and ``Address[FUND](height)``?

An alternative is to define an "epoch" which has a start and end height, then a set of `k` funds, each fund has a proportion and a sequence of addresses. Either can work for this proposal, although the first approach can be useful if we wanted to propose different funding streams starting and stopping in the future at different times.

Author: I will make the suggested parameterisation change.

> - To-do: adjust ``AddressChangeInterval``, taking #3672 and #3690 (both reducing block times) into account.

Reviewer 2: With the proposed change @bitcartel and @daira gave [above / in earlier review](https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/201/files#r248786267) the *amounts* would become fractions of the total block issuance, which helps decouple from changes to block rate. Can we have the same decoupling from time?

I guess that may be messier if we try to use real-time and then map that to block heights. Is there any simple way to decouple it which still relies only on block heights directly?

If it's too messy, we can just dovetail this and the block rate proposal, but if it's possible to decouple them, that has some advantages: easier reasoning about each piece independently, we can propose changes to block rate in the future with less hassle, we can propose changes to funding streams in the future with less hassle.

Consensus rules
---------------

Prior to activation of the Blossom network upgrade, the existing consensus rule for payment of the original
Founders' Reward is enforced. [#original-fr-consensus-rule]_

Once the Blossom network upgrade activates:

- The existing consensus rule [#original-fr-consensus-rule]_ is no longer active.
- The coinbase transaction in each block MUST contain at least one output per active funding stream that pays
  the stream's value to the stream's recipient address for the block's height.

Stream definitions
------------------

> The three logical funding streams described above each start at the Blossom activation height, and end at the

Reviewer: Delete logical as these are now three separate streams.

Reviewer 2: The three funding streams have actually always been distinct, but the "implementation" has been legal / organizational rather than consensus based. Therefore, I propose:

```suggestion
The three consensus-defined funding streams described above each start at the Blossom activation height, and end at the
```

I want to be able to say accurately things like "this consensus change transitioned these three funding streams from a legal/organizational construct into blockchain consensus rules." and having some way to distinguish the two cases helps.

first block reward halving. They are defined as follows:

======== ================ ================== ================================
 Stream  Value (zatoshis)    Start height              End height
======== ================ ================== ================================
   FR       184250000     Blossom activation SlowStartShift + HalvingInterval
  ZF E       36000000     Blossom activation SlowStartShift + HalvingInterval

> ZECC SR      29750000     Blossom activation SlowStartShift + HalvingInterval

Author: These values are calculated from the percentages in the Motivation, and will need to be updated.

Reviewer: In pairing with Daira: regarding the naming of the streams, should FR refer to the sum of all the streams to be consistent with the terminology currently in use, with distinct names for the individual streams?

Reviewer 2: Agreed on naming, and I request that we go with "The ZECC Equity Fund" to be the name for the FR minus the Strategic Reserve and Foundation's Fund unless someone brings up a red flag / blocker for that term before this proposal is finalized.

======== ================ ================== ================================

- To-do: specify the correct values.
- To-do: specify the correct start height.
- To-do: adjust the end height, taking #3672 and #3690 (both reducing block times) into account.

> The sets of recipient addresses are defined as follows:

Reviewer 2: It is very likely we need to decouple the explicit addresses from the spec, at least in terms of timing (so that we can commit to the spec prior to knowing the addresses). That approach would be similar to how Sapling was specified and committed to prior to the parameters being ready. In both cases, of course, the final "parameters" have to be ready prior to the activation-height-commitment release.

.. code:: cpp

    FS_ADDRESSES_FR = [
    ];

    FS_ADDRESSES_ZF_E = [
    ];

    FS_ADDRESSES_ZECC_SR = [
    ];

- To-do: will the existing FR addresses be used for either the Zcash Company strategic reserve or the remainder, or will fresh addresses be used for all three?
- To-do: specify the sets of FR addresses.

> - To-do: require that the three FR address sets are PGP-signed with appropriate keys.

Reviewer 2: Yes. We can potentially commit to the PGP keys inside this spec.

Example implementation
----------------------

.. code:: cpp

    struct FundingPeriod {
        CAmount value,
        int startHeight,
        int endHeight,
    };

    enum FundingStream {

>         FS_FR,

Reviewer 2: Rename the constant to match the new name for "The ZECC Equity Fund" instead of repurposing "Founders' Reward".

                bool found = false;

                for (const CTxOut& output : block.vtx[0].vout) {
                    if (output.scriptPubKey == Params().GetFoundersRewardScriptAtHeight(nHeight)) {
                        if (output.nValue == (GetBlockSubsidy(nHeight, consensusParams) / 5)) {
                            found = true;
                            break;
                        }
                    }
                }

                if (!found) {
                    return state.DoS(100, error("%s: founders reward missing", __func__), REJECT_INVALID, "cb-no-founders-reward");
                }
            }
        }

        ...
    }

Deployment
==========

This proposal will be deployed with the Blossom network upgrade. [#zip-0XXX]_

Backward compatibility
======================

This proposal intentionally creates what is known as a "bilateral consensus rule change". Use of this
mechanism requires that all network participants upgrade their software to a compatible version within the
upgrade window. Older software will treat post-upgrade blocks as invalid, and will follow any pre-upgrade
branch that persists.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal is designed with the explicit requirements of not altering the overall issuance schedule (based on time), nor does it alter the proportion or timeline of the overall Founders' Reward. As a result, no users outside of the Zerocoin Electric Coin Company and Zcash Foundation should experience any UX or economic change outside of the upgrade due to this proposal itself.
```

                        if (output.nValue == (GetBlockSubsidy(nHeight, consensusParams) / 5)) {
                            found = true;
                            break;
                        }
                    }
                }

                if (!found) {
                    return state.DoS(100, error("%s: founders reward missing", __func__), REJECT_INVALID, "cb-no-founders-reward");
                }
            }
        }

        ...
    }

Deployment
==========

This proposal will be deployed with the Blossom network upgrade. [#zip-0XXX]_

Backward compatibility
======================

This proposal intentionally creates what is known as a "bilateral consensus rule change". Use of this
mechanism requires that all network participants upgrade their software to a compatible version within the
upgrade window. Older software will treat post-upgrade blocks as invalid, and will follow any pre-upgrade
branch that persists.

This proposal is designed with the explicit requirement of not altering the overall issuance schedule (based
on time), nor does it alter the proportion or timeline of the overall Founders' Reward. As a result, no users

> outside of the Zerocoin Electric Coin Company and Zcash Foundation should experience any UX or economic change

Reviewer 2: `Zerocoin Electric Coin Company` → `Electric Coin Company`
